\section{Chapter 2: Forecasting Chlorophyll Concentration in Regional
Aggregates}

\noindent \emph{Duration: 2 months (by February 2015)}

\noindent \emph{Submission: Progress in Oceanography}

\noindent \emph{Collaborator: Dionysios Raitsos}

\vspace{5mm}

Chlorophyll data is very complex. It is therefore useful to first simplify it
by aggregating it spatially. The space-time dynamics of the chlorophyll data
reflects the highly nonlinear dynamics of the underlying physical, chemical and
biological phenomenons. As shown by the north-south gradient and the seasonal
behavior, the resulting space-time process is nonstationary in time and in
space. The high-dimensionality in space can be reduced by considering a
regional aggregation of the data. This would allow us to focus on the global
scale phenomenons: such as the interactions between neighboring regions, the
time-scale of large events and the difference in the physical variables
affecting the chlorophyll concentration in each region. In the following tasks,
these simple predictive models will also be a reference for evaluating more
complex ones. 

\paragraph{Open Questions}

\begin{itemize}

\item Is the biological aggregation of the Red Sea proposed in
\cite{Raitsos2013} statistically meaningful?

\item Can clustering methods be used to identify marine ecological zones based
on chlorophyll data?

\item Would a simple forecasting model allow us to identify the causes of
chlorophyll blooms?

\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Methods}

\begin{enumerate}

\item Define datasets (training and test datasets, cross-validation).

\item Variable selection (Lasso, L1 regression, single-variable linear
regression).

\item Define regional aggregations (unsupervised learning, Hierarchical
clustering, K-means).

\item Build regional statistical models to forecast chlorophyll concentration
(linear regression, GAM models, diagnostic, k-nearest neighbors).

\item Predicting future extreme blooms (nearest-neighbours, logistic
regression, decision trees)

\end{enumerate}

\paragraph{Expected Outcomes}

\begin{itemize}

\item A division of the Red Sea into environmentaly distinct regions that has
been quantitatively evaluated.

\item A critical evaluation of current hypotheses about the chlorophyll
dynamics in the Red Sea.

\item A lower bound for the performance of a more sophisticated model.

\item An assessment of the limitation of aggregate methods for Chlorophyll
data.

\item An understanding of how the treatment of spatial correlations may improve
cholorphyll forecasting.

\end{itemize}
